Neural networks are a fundamental computational tool for language processing, and a very old one. They are called neural because their origins lie in theMcCulloch-Pitts neuron (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943), a simplified model of the
biological neuron as a kind of computing element that could be described in terms
of propositional logic. But the modern use in language processing no longer draws
on these early biological inspirations.
Instead, a modern neural network is a network of small computing units, each
of which takes a vector of input values and produces a single output value. In this
chapter we introduce the neural net applied to classification. The architecture we
introduce is called a feedforward network because the computation proceeds iter-feedforwardatively from one layer of units to the next. The use of modern neural nets is often
called deep learning, because modern networks are often deep (have many layers).deep learningNeural networks share much of the same mathematics as logistic regression. But
neural networks are a more powerful classifier than logistic regression, and indeed a
minimal neural network (technically one with a single ‘hidden layer’) can be shown
to learn any function.
Neural net classifiers are different from logistic regression in another way. With
logistic regression, we applied the regression classifier to many different tasks by
developing many rich kinds of feature templates based on domain knowledge. When
working with neural networks, it is more common to avoid most uses of rich handderived features, instead building neural networks that take raw tokens as inputs
and learn to induce features as part of the process of learning to classify. We saw
examples of this kind of representation learning for embeddings in Chapter 5, and
we’ll see lots of examples once we start studying deep transformer networks. Nets
that are very deep are particularly good at representation learning. For that reason
deep neural nets are the right tool for tasks that offer sufficient data to learn features
automatically.
In this chapter we’ll introduce feedforward networks as classifiers, first with
hand-built features, and then using the embeddings that we studied in Chapter 5.
In subsequent chapters we’ll introduce many other kinds of neural models, most
importantly the transformer and attention (Chapter 7), but also recurrent neural
networks (Chapter 14) and convolutional neural networks (Chapter 16). And in
the next chapter we’ll introduce the paradigm of neural large language models
2 CHAPTER 6 • NEURAL NETWORKS6.1 UnitsThe building block of a neural network is a single computational unit. A unit takes
a set of real valued numbers as input, performs some computation on them, and
produces an output.
At its heart, a neural unit is taking a weighted sum of its inputs, with one additional term in the sum called a bias term. Given a set of inputs x1...xn, a unit hasbias terma set of corresponding weights w1...wn and a bias b, so the weighted sum z can be
represented as:z = b + Xiwixi (6.1)
Often it’s more convenient to express this weighted sum using vector notation; recall
from linear algebra that a vector is, at heart, just a list or array of numbers. Thusvectorwe’ll talk about z in terms of a weight vector w, a scalar bias b, and an input vectorx, and we’ll replace the sum with the convenient dot product:z = w · x + b (6.2)
As defined in Eq. 6.2, z is just a real valued number.
Finally, instead of using z, a linear function of x, as the output, neural units
apply a non-linear function f to z. We will refer to the output of this function as
the activation value for the unit, a. Since we are just modeling a single unit, theactivationactivation for the node is in fact the final output of the network, which we’ll generally
call y. So the value y is defined as:y = a = f (z)We’ll discuss three popular non-linear functions f below (the sigmoid, the tanh, and
the rectified linear unit or ReLU) but it’s pedagogically convenient to start with thesigmoid function since we saw it in Chapter 4:sigmoidy = σ (z) = 1
1 + e−z (6.3)
The sigmoid (shown in Fig. 6.1) has a number of advantages; it maps the output
into the range (0, 1), which is useful in squashing outliers toward 0 or 1. And it’s
differentiable, which as we saw in Section ?? will be handy for learning.Figure 6.1 The sigmoid function takes a real value and maps it to the range (0, 1). It is
nearly linear around 0 but outlier values get squashed toward 0 or 1.Substituting Eq. 6.2 into Eq. 6.3 gives us the output of a neural unit:6.1 • UNITS 3y = σ (w · x + b) = 1
1 + exp(−(w · x + b)) (6.4)
Fig. 6.2 shows a final schematic of a basic neural unit. In this example the unit
takes 3 input values x1, x2, and x3, and computes a weighted sum, multiplying each
value by a weight (w1, w2, and w3, respectively), adds them to a bias term b, and then
passes the resulting sum through a sigmoid function to result in a number between 0
and 1.x1x2x3yw1w2w3∑bσ+1z aFigure 6.2 A neural unit, taking 3 inputs x1, x2, and x3 (and a bias b that we represent as a
weight for an input clamped at +1) and producing an output y. We include some convenient
intermediate variables: the output of the summation, z, and the output of the sigmoid, a. In
this case the output of the unit y is the same as a, but in deeper networks we’ll reserve y to
mean the final output of the entire network, leaving a as the activation of an individual node.Let’s walk through an example just to get an intuition. Let’s suppose we have a
unit with the following weight vector and bias:w = [0.2, 0.3, 0.9]b = 0.5
What would this unit do with the following input vector:x = [0.5, 0.6, 0.1]The resulting output y would be:y = σ (w · x + b) = 1
1 + e−(w·x+b) = 1
1 + e−(.5∗.2+.6∗.3+.1∗.9+.5) = 1
1 + e−0.87 = .70
In practice, the sigmoid is not commonly used as an activation function. A function
that is very similar but almost always better is the tanh function shown in Fig. 6.3a;tanhtanh is a variant of the sigmoid that ranges from -1 to +1:y = tanh(z) = ez − e−zez + e−z (6.5)
The simplest activation function, and perhaps the most commonly used, is the rectified linear unit, also called the ReLU, shown in Fig. 6.3b. It’s just the same as zReLUwhen z is positive, and 0 otherwise:y = ReLU(z) = max(z, 0) (6.6)
These activation functions have different properties that make them useful for differ-
6.3 • FEEDFORWARD NEURAL NETWORKS 700 11x1x2a) The original x space00 11h1h22b) The new (linearly separable) h spaceFigure 6.7 The hidden layer forming a new representation of the input. (b) shows the
representation of the hidden layer, h, compared to the original input representation x in (a).
Notice that the input point [0, 1] has been collapsed with the input point [1, 0], making it
possible to linearly separate the positive and negative cases of XOR. After Goodfellow et al.
(2016).6.3 Feedforward Neural NetworksLet’s now walk through a slightly more formal presentation of the simplest kind of
neural network, the feedforward network. A feedforward network is a multilayerfeedforward
networknetwork in which the units are connected with no cycles; the outputs from units in
each layer are passed to units in the next higher layer, and no outputs are passed
back to lower layers. (In Chapter 14 we’ll introduce networks with cycles, calledrecurrent neural networks.)
For historical reasons multilayer networks, especially feedforward networks, are
sometimes called multi-layer perceptrons (or MLPs); this is a technical misnomer,multi-layer
perceptrons
MLP since the units in modern multilayer networks aren’t perceptrons (perceptrons have a
simple step-function as their activation function, but modern networks are made up
of units with many kinds of non-linearities like ReLUs and sigmoids), but at some
point the name stuck.
Simple feedforward networks have three kinds of nodes: input units, hidden
units, and output units.
Fig. 6.8 shows a picture. The input layer x is a vector of simple scalar values just
as we saw in Fig. 6.2.
The core of the neural network is the hidden layer h formed of hidden units hi,hidden layereach of which is a neural unit as described in Section 6.1, taking a weighted sum of
its inputs and then applying a non-linearity. In the standard architecture, each layer
is fully-connected, meaning that each unit in each layer takes as input the outputsfully-connectedfrom all the units in the previous layer, and there is a link between every pair of units
from two adjacent layers. Thus each hidden unit sums over all the input units.
Recall that a single hidden unit has as parameters a weight vector and a bias. We
represent the parameters for the entire hidden layer by combining the weight vector
and bias for each unit i into a single weight matrix W and a single bias vector b for
the whole layer (see Fig. 6.8). Each element W ji of the weight matrix W represents
the weight of the connection from the ith input unit xi to the jth hidden unit h j.
The advantage of using a single matrix W for the weights of the entire layer is
that now the hidden layer computation for a feedforward network can be done very8 CHAPTER 6 • NEURAL NETWORKSx1x2xn0......+1 b...UWinput layer hidden layer output layerh1y1y2yn2h2h3hn1Figure 6.8 A simple 2-layer feedforward network, with one hidden layer, one output layer,
and one input layer (the input layer is usually not counted when enumerating layers).efficiently with simple matrix operations. In fact, the computation only has three
steps: multiplying the weight matrix by the input vector x, adding the bias vector b,
and applying the activation function g (such as the sigmoid, tanh, or ReLU activation
function defined above).
The output of the hidden layer, the vector h, is thus the following (for this example we’ll use the sigmoid function σ as our activation function):h = σ (Wx + b) (6.8)Notice that we’re applying the σ function here to a vector, while in Eq. 6.3 it was
applied to a scalar. We’re thus allowing σ (·), and indeed any activation functiong(·), to apply to a vector element-wise, so g[z1, z2, z3] = [g(z1), g(z2), g(z3)].
Let’s introduce some constants to represent the dimensionalities of these vectors
and matrices. We’ll refer to the input layer as layer 0 of the network, and haven0 represent the number of inputs, so x is a vector of real numbers of dimensionn0, or more formally x ∈ Rn0 , a column vector of dimensionality [n0 × 1]. Let’s
call the hidden layer layer 1 and the output layer layer 2. The hidden layer has
dimensionality n1, so h ∈ Rn1 and also b ∈ Rn1 (since each hidden unit can take a
different bias value). And the weight matrix W has dimensionality W ∈ Rn1×n0 , i.e.[n1 × n0].
Take a moment to convince yourself that the matrix multiplication in Eq. 6.8 will
compute the value of each h j as σ 